### Shade Equity in Los Angeles
 
Shade access is a public health and an equity issue. Without sufficient shade, transit dependent commuters are forced to wait for the bus amidst intense heat. The City of Los Angeles, like many cities, is expected to see an increase in the number of days of extreme heat. Visits to emergency rooms (ER) because of heatwaves and heat strokes are increasing. Considering the forecasts of extreme heat days, it is the responsibility of planners and architects to ensure that public spaces are well-equipped with shade. This research will provide answers to the following questions:(1) How does access to shade in Los Angeles vary across the Metro 20 bus route? (2) To what extent does access to shade across the Metro 20 bus route vary by median household income of census tracts?


The setup of transit use and transit dependence in LA also makes shade equity an important concern. In LA, long waiting times for buses and significant delays are common. Communities of color and low-income communities are often most dependent on public transportation in LA. To ensure that public transportation is truly accessible, an analysis of shade access is thus necessary. Our research builds on [recent work of Sam Bloch](https://placesjournal.org/article/shade-an-urban-design-mandate/) on shade as an index of inequality and indicator of public health. This research matters to transportation planners and policymakers for multiple reasons. First, our commitment to move people safely requires us to plan for all stages of travel, including waiting times. Second, identifying shade deserts will help policymakers direct resources for improvement in shade access. Finally, what is at stake are key concerns of public health and public safety. 


The spatial scope of this research project is the bus route corridor for Metro’s 20 line in Los Angeles. We chose this route because this line connects from Downtown LA to Westwood. In addition, the route’s connection to the Wilshire corridor, an area with multiple job centers, makes this route suitable. Time as a metric matters for our project mostly because of the imminent effects of climate change and rising temperatures. Space matters in this project because of the political nature of access to shade. As reporters like Tim Arango have noted elsewhere, wealthier neighborhoods of Los Angeles have a tree canopy of more than 35 percent, whereas other areas have a much lower tree cover. 


We will use four data sources in our project. First, we will identify Metro Route 20 in the [Metro Bus Lines data set](https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/898c91b2d8f046608a4df64de8d36649_3). Ideally, we can combine the characteristics from [City of LA Bus Stops/Benches](https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/bus-stop-benches) into the dataset so that we can identify what the infrastructure of the bus stop is. This can be done as a join in R. Next, we will use the street tree data from [street tree data City of LA](https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/trees-bureau-of-street-services) to identify which bus stops are near shade trees. Finally, we will use Census Data to examine the income levels and demographics of the census tracts Bus 20 moves through. If there is missing data about the bus stop infrastructure, we will go out to Wilshire Blvd and check existing data and make notes about the infrastructure. We do not yet have data for Beverly Hills trees so we either have to find it or walk the 2-3 miles of Route 20 through Beverly Hills to mark shade trees near bus stops. 


In our presentation, we will introduce the issue of rising median temperatures in Los Angeles and the increasing incidence of heat related illnesses in emergency rooms. We will focus on a mode of travel where the traveler is more vulnerable to heat illness. Our map will identify all the bus stops on the Metro 20 route, which goes from Westwood/UCLA to downtown Los Angeles. We anticipate using different icons to show bus stops with benches, with shade shelters, stops with both, and stops with neither. Then we will overlay tree data from City of Los Angeles and, hopefully, City of Beverly Hills, to infer which bus stops have tree shade or cover. Our visualization for bus stop infrastructure and shade may have a legend for different colors by shade cover and a different shape if the shade is provided by a tree or a shaded bus stop. 


Our primary interest is in heat exposure mitigation by shade at bus stops. By combining tree shade cover and bus stop details, we are hoping to show how public transit infrastructure can be harmful to its users. As the median temperatures rise in Los Angeles and heat waves become more frequent, the lack of rest and shade infrastructure at bus stops increases the risk of heat exposure and fatigue for transit riders. At minimum, our map will tell a story about what may happen to a vulnerable subset of Angelenos if transportation equity is not prioritized by Metro. In theory, this map will be interpretable by laypeople and policymakers who can easily identify the problem and existing sites for improvement. 
